hello everyone I'm pleased to announce
my new tour for 2024 beginning in early
February and running through June Tammy
and I an assortment of special guests
are going to visit 51 cities in the US
you can find out more information about
this on my website
jordanbpeterson.com as well as accessing
all relevant ticketing information I'm
going to use the tour to walk through
some of the ideas I've been working on
my forthcoming book out November 2024 we
who wrestle with God I'm looking forward
to this I'm thrilled to be able to do it
again and I'll be pleased to see all of
you again soon
bye-bye and so I learned early on
sometimes you have to give yourself what
you wish you could get from somebody
else and unless and until you can do
that you're cheating everybody around
you that loves you cares about you or
interfaces with you out of all of Who
You
[Music]
Are
hello everyone I have the opportunity
today to talk to Dr Phil McGraw who's
probably perhaps the world's most
well-known practicing clinical
psychologist uh certainly on the on the
media side of things and he's been doing
that with extreme success for decades
and that's quite something to pull off
and he's come leaping forward once again
not only with a new network that's going
to launch on cable and Elsewhere on
April 2nd but also with a new book
called we've got issues which is
definitely the case uh both
psychologically and socially in the west
and so that's what we're going to walk
through um he offers a diagnosis he sees
that three fundamental pillars of
Western society and psychological
stability are under assault ideological
assault practical assault simultaneously
um pillars of faith family and free
speech so that's a bit of a diagnostic
Enterprise and then he offers 10 working
principles to deal with those assaults
and some of those are valid
psychologically and some of them valid
socially uh they all circulate around a
central ethos you might say so we
discuss all 10 principles we discuss the
ethos around which they circulate we
discover that we discussed the necessity
of principled conception and action for
psychological stability and social unity
and U that constitutes the discussion so
you're welcome
to watch and listen thanks very much all
right well hello Dr Phil it's it's very
good to meet you and uh thank you for
agreeing to talk to me today it seems
like you're everywhere at the moment and
and I want to talk about how you managed
that but I suspect it has something to
do at least with the topic of your new
book which is we've got issues yeah well
that certainly seems to be the case and
you start the book by outlining in your
estimation well by making the case that
there is something that's under attack
or a set of things that are under attack
and you concentrate on Free Speech Faith
and family and so I guess the first
obvious question is why do you believe
that we're under attack so to speak why
that metaphor under attack by what and
why did you pick those three principles
uh as the as the central focus of your
of your alert and your defense great
question and it's it's so good to sit
down and talk to you so thank you for uh
having me as a guest I'm I'm honored to
be here um listen I I've been doing this
for a long time as have you and I've
been dealing with the public for a long
time and listening to their
questions um you know we get tens of
thousands of emails you know writing in
and I've noticed that they've really
changed across time uh because when you
think about it
um when I started out uh my career in in
Psychology uh it was you know way back
in the 70s so I've been through the 70s
the 80s the 90s all the way up till now
when I started out on television was
and the first textt message hasn't even
been sent at that point so things have
really changed and the rate of change
has really accelerated uh across time
and you know a lot of this technolog is
good I mean there great benefits from it
of course but there are a lot of uh
unintended side effects as well and when
I when I look at what's going on in this
country um I I think that the backbone
of any Society is the family I think
that's the strength of any society and
when I say it's under attack uh I I
think it's under attack uh in part
unintentionally by technology and in
part because there are people that are
pushing
narratives um in current society that
have nothing to do with reality have
nothing to do with science have nothing
to do with fact nothing to do with
history they're just running an agenda
that's very
self-referential and it is not in our
best interest at all to sit silently by
and allow these people to
hijack uh what's going on uh The
Narrative of this country and I'll tell
you further um that I believe that if if
we don't speak up this I call it the
tyranny of The Fringe I think if we
don't speak up uh they're going to
hijack and and and start taking over
they're going to take over language
they're going to take over uh priorities
and um and how those priorities are
pursued and I I hear I'm talking about
things that I think could absolutely
undermine uh Society like this equality
of outcome concept uh to
me uh I I can't think of anything more
destructive to a society than teaching
everybody that we're going to work
towards an equality of outcome that's
been
tried uh we've got 100,000 corpses to
prove that doesn't work um and
so uh I think that uh we've been uh just
the same in America and in Canada has
been built on a
meritocracy where hard work was rewarded
Talent was rewarded added value was
rewarded and now all of a sudden we're
violating some of the most fundamental
principles of the
psychology uh like just simply don't
reward bad behavior uh don't support
things you don't want to see more of I
mean this is psych
101 but it seems
like people ski that course it seems
like those that are trying to run some
of these agendas uh don't understand um
that you you have to have an insight
into how people are motivated what gets
them passionate what gets them moving
forward and when I see these things
happening I say well somebody's got to
step up and call this out for what it is
which is lunacy and uh but you know
we're people are three times as uh
unwilling to speak up now as they were
in 1950 I mean the number of people
unwilling to take the risk is tripled
since
1950 okay so let me walk through these
things again I I'll lay out a bit of my
understanding and and then if you could
push back and elaborate on that that
would be helpful so it seems to me with
regard to family so human beings are
unique biologically because of the
unbelievably extended dependency period
of our children and so we are we have a
particular reproductive strategy um
other
creatures have that reproductive
strategy to some degree but we are the
ultimate exemplars of low reproductive
rate high investment strategies and it
seems to me that the Cory of that is
that
raising children is sufficiently
challenging and difficult and also
important that one person can't do it
well on average and so the rule seems to
be both morally and perhaps arguably
biologically that the nuclear family is
the necessary minimum of social
Arrangement that allows for propagation
it's something like that and so if we
fragment the family below the level of
the nuclear then things fall apart now
maybe the nuclear family is also too
fragmented but we could start with it as
a minimal basis and so any attempt to
for example put forward the claim that
all familial structures are of equal
value is counterproductive if it's the
case that raising children is so complex
that a minimum of two people have to
engage in it so that's on the family
side on the Free Speech side I don't
think there's any difference between
free speech and thought fun mentally
thought can be awkward because critical
thought requires that people dispense
with their foolish ideas and that can be
painful and people who push the no
offense agenda would like to believe
that we can think and we can think
critically without any emotional
consequences and I don't think that's
true because it's actually painful to
have your ideas exposed as foolish and
then to dispense with them and so we we
seem to be have entered as a situation
where compassion for short-term
consequences means that we're willing to
allow foolish things to propagate even
though that will cause long-term
catastrophe and there's there's a
technical description of morality in
there too which I think you kind of
point to when you talk about your
working principles don't reward bad
behavior support conduct conduct you do
not value for example that's an
injunction not to let foolish things
occur in the present if even if stopping
them causes some emotional disruption
because then worse things will happen in
the future and then the last one is
Faith and faith is a hard thing to
defend in some ways because people say
faith in what but my sense is that that
we have to move forward in faith because
we're ignorant and that means that we
have to bet on some things rather than
others and so the question there starts
to become you know what is it that we
should bet on and so with regard to
Faith
how do you how do you negotiate that
you're a scientifically oriented thinker
as well and so when you're making the
case that if faith is under attack we're
in trouble what how do you justify that
claim well for me I I think there are
there are some things that we know there
are some things we don't know there are
some things that we can't know and we we
have to kind of sort those out and
that's where faith comes in uh I think
back you know scientifically there was a
time that we didn't have the
instrumentation uh to see a molecule
that didn't mean it didn't exist we just
didn't have the instrumentation to
observe it and I'm I'm the same way
about what you were saying about
thoughts um you know I'm I guess if I
was going to categorize myself uh
value-wise from a professional
standpoint uh it would lean more toward
cognitive behaviorist than anything and
in cognitive behaviorism we treat
thoughts as behaviors because they are
observable to a public of one and so the
fact that it is an observable event even
if to just a public of one I tend to
treat those as Behavior so um I think we
we have to look at what our thoughts are
and think about okay uh we see this are
we being rational in our thought are we
not being rational in our thought and to
me it's not
irrational to recognize that we are not
all knowing we are not the repository of
all knowledge and to assume that just
because we can't show you faith on an
X-ray just we like we can a broken leg
is the same thing about depression
people don't understand how
psychometrics work they think we're
measuring depression and in fact we're
not what we're doing is saying we're
going to give you these psychometrics
and what we're going to do is tell you
that you have an awful lot in common
with people who have obser been observed
to be depressed uh they have higher
suicidality they spend more time crying
they spend more time with flat affect or
whatever um so we can't tell you you're
depressed but we can tell you you answer
these items consistent with an awful lot
of people who are depressed and that we
have observed and so um you know again
there's a there's a certain
extrapolation from that that we have to
rely on we can't measure it like we do
with an x-ray or an MRI with a brain
scan and it's not a big leap to
me uh to say that I do have faith I mean
I I am a Christian I've never seen a
conflict between that and my approach to
science um I I just look at this as
something that uh we don't yet have
observ able measurement for uh just like
we didn't for the molecule or other
smaller units of function so uh I don't
have trouble reconciling that but I
guess I take it on faith which is kind
of defining something by itself and I
know that's circular in nature uh but uh
it it works for me and I think an awful
lot of people um find comfort in the
belief system that there is a higher
power that I choose to call God that uh
is kind of involved in our lives on a as
active a basis if as we want to
acknowledge um and I'm I'm one of those
Christians Jordan that believes in pray
to God but Row for the shore um so
that's why I don't see it as conflict
I'm I'm still going to do everything I
can do I'm still going to work as hard
as I can can work I'm going to do
everything uh because I I I believe that
if if there is a God and I believe there
is then I think I've been given certain
gifts talents skills abilities and and
and and free will to do what I can and
will do so uh to me I I don't see that
there is equity in uh creating a
conflict between science and Faith so so
I'm going to elaborate on the faith idea
here too because you know you pointed
out that because we're ignorant we we
have to rely on our judgment to move
forward and we're we're permanently
ignorant because we actually can't
predict the future it's the future is
actually not predictable it's not the
world is not deterministic and we know
this for a number of reasons many of
which are scientific so we have to move
forward in faith and so the monotheistic
hypothesis is that there's an ultimate
unity and and also that that's what we
should have faith in and so I want to
run something by you and you tell me
what you think about this so there's a
there's a
uh an autobiographical account in the
gospels of one of Christ's reactions to
a particular question and so he's being
tormented by the scribes and the
Pharisees and the uh and the lawyers uh
so nothing's really changed the
Pharisees are hypocrites the scribes are
academics and the lawyers well they're
still lawyers and what they're
essentially trying to do continually in
the gospel account is to trap Christ
into making a heretical statement so
that they can have him arrested and
destroyed and so they're attempting to
reputation Savage essentially and so at
one point this is a very famous scene
and I'm sure you know it um one of the
one of his uh opponents challenges Jesus
to describe which of The Commandments is
the primary
commandment and the hope there is that
he'll pick one and by picking one will
denigrate the others and because he's
denigrating the others in comparison
they can bring them up on charges of
heresy and he says something quite
remarkable he says that the Ten
Commandments are manifestations of an
underlying Unity of moral
conceptualization and that they
circulate around a particular theme and
the theme you can express the theme
quite concisely in a two-fold manner you
should aim at what's best God you should
align yourself with the highest possible
aim that's number one so that orients
you and then number two you should treat
other people's as though as you would
like to be treated you should put
yourself in their position and work for
that harmonious Unity that would emerge
if you treated other people the way you
would want to be treated if you were
treating yourself properly so it's
interesting so really what he's doing
it's so interesting he's taking a cloud
of conception which is The Ten
Commandments which were themselves
derived from an analysis it's an
analysis like you said you conducted in
some ways by listening to the tens of
thousands of comments that you've
received from the people who've been
watching and listening to what you've
been doing you accumulated all of this
um Cries From the people let's say you
derive a set of principles as a
consequence of that but those principles
themselves Orient around something
that's
Central That central point of
orientation I think is equivalent to God
and it's also equivalent to what we
should have faith in and so I would say
do you tell me what you think this is
where the question is now you you
outlined a set of problems attack on
Free Speech Faith and family and then
you identified 10 working principles so
what do you think of the idea that that
which you have faith in and I'm speaking
personally here that which you have
faith in is equivalent to the spirit
that all of these principles point to
you see what I mean that there's an
underlying Unity there that makes those
principles coherent does that strike you
as plausible it does strike me as
plausible and I and I I leave room for
that to be defined differently by each
person uh that is sorting through the
events of their life you know the the
first principle that I have in uh got
issues how you can stand strong for
America's Soul Insanity which is I think
that the the subtitle of this book is as
important as the title because the book
is very
prescriptive uh you know any any jackass
can kick down a barn but it takes a
carpenter to build one back and I don't
like it when people criticize and then
don't offer a better alternative if you
don't have a better alternative why
don't you just shut up cuz all you're
doing is just poking holes in something
and I think think you need to have a an
alternative and I I think it begins with
something that um the reason I say that
I think it's each person comes at it
from a different point of view even
though there is a unifying principle is
I think we all have a personal truth
and and that personal truth is what we
think feel and believe about ourselves
when nobody else is looking nobody else
is listening we've taken off the social
mask and we're being honest with
ourselves and unless people have made a
concerted
effort uh to do some repairs we all have
a damaged personal truth um and so mean
it's I I think about it like a a brand
new shiny Yellow Cab rolling out in New
York the first day and it looks great
and it's shiny and and everything is
perfect and you catch up with it 20
years later uh it's going to look like a
dog's been chewing on it out in the
backyard it's going to be dinged up it's
going to had vendor Benders it's going
to have people that have thrown up in
the back seat it's going I mean it's
going to just have taken on a lot of
hits along the way and I think we're
that way in life and some of us more
than others and I think the reason
personal truth is so important in
getting to that unifying principle is we
generate the results in life we think we
deserve and so if we think we're a
second class citizen if we think we
don't measure up to everybody else in
some way we're going to generate the
results that are consistent with that it
and you know this will sound arrogant
but I think most people are capable of
doing this there are certain people I
can see just walking down the sidewalk
and without any other information than
just what I'm looking at there are
certain things that I know about that
person I mean if there's somebody that a
doesn't take care of themselves uh their
clothes are unkempt doesn't matter how
nice they are it's just they're unkempt
you know they're kind of heads down
they're shuffling along it just seems
like every step is barely what they can
do I I know for one one thing for
certain in my mind is that person has a
damaged personal truth because they're
generating that existence in their life
um and they're not walking with their
head up and their shoulders back they're
not out in the middle of the sidewalk
there's kind of skullking along the side
they're generating exactly what they
think they deserve and I think that
80% of uh Society can wind up in that
role if they feel guilty about what they
think and believe and we have evidence
of this uh in that the number of people
willing to speak out has tripled
unwilling to speak out has tripled in
the last 75 years so there's a lack of
passion and conviction perhaps and and a
fear of being cancelled attacked um uh
having the woke mob come after them um
and you I I'm a perfect example of it I
I grew up with an alcoholic father um it
was a chaotic and often times violent
home um a lot of times we didn't have
money to turn the electricity on um I
had three sisters two of them were
married 11 between them 11 times which
you think is pretty hard to do unless
you start when you're like 14 and then
you can get some in fairly early on um
and I I lived with all of this and
people make this mistake and it's why
our young people right now I'll get to
that in a minute maybe but it's why our
young people right now are experiencing
a mental emotional crisis um with high
levels of anxiety depression loneliness
suicidal ideation and
suicidality um because people compare
their personal truth with other people's
social mask and I could go to school and
I know that I just left a house that was
in chaos the utilities were turned off
we didn't have food my dad was drunk in
the street and I'm sitting next to a kid
with a pressed shirt on and a washed
face and his hair's all combed and if I
compare my reality to his social mask
I'm going to lose every single time now
he may have it worse off than I ever
thought of having uh but if you compare
your reality to his social Mass you're
going to lose no we we elaborated on the
idea that you know you elaborated out a
set of principles and that there's a
unifying theme behind them and then you
said you you you bought that explanation
but then you pointed to the fact that
other people may come to the
table with a different set of principles
and so there's a there's a way that the
universal particularizes itself in each
life you know I would say tell me what
you think of this proposition so imagine
that another person might generate a
different list of 10 working principles
but that the higher order principle from
which those are derived would remain
essentially constant and I would think
that would be equivalent to the to the
undamaged card that you described you
know so there's an Old Testament account
of the Prophet Elijah and Elijah is the
first prophet who posits that God is the
voice of
conscience now and you you made the case
that you made the case at least by
inference that people are blessed with
the ability
to find to establish a relationship with
something that calls to them from within
that might be slightly might that might
happen in a different way for each
person I mean that's really the
difference between people's personality
and their temperament then you made the
case that if they deviate from that that
becomes so obvious that you can even see
it in their day-to-day Behavior you can
see it when you're watching people when
you walk down the street you know Dr
Phil one of the things I've noticed is
that most people don't watch other
people when they walk down the street
right they look at the ground or they're
in their own little bubble I mean if you
watch people on the street you can get
an eye full of who they are very very
rapidly and you know if people are
particularly angry and bitter and
they're walking down the street and you
pay attention to them that actually
sometimes makes them angry which is why
people will avoid eye contact because
you reflect back to them the hell that
they've trapped themselves in and they
find that very unpleasant now part of
the reason I wrote in my first book I
wrote the injunction to people to stand
up straight with their shoulders back
was to reflect in the microcosm of their
behavior an orientation upward word and
towards what the good was and that that
is embedded in everything that people do
and every glance they make and every
step they take forward so
so I think it's it is the case that
people can have their own set of
principles they come to that would be
the same in some ways as that they come
to they come to what is highest in their
own personal way but that doesn't
indicate that the landscape is morally
relative or that there's no Unity
towards which our conscience and our
moral orientation point so you know I
would even that's way reconciling that
plurality go ahead I would even say that
they come at it with a different point
of view they might not even even want to
change the 10 principles uh but they
might interpret them differently in how
they apply to their own existence um so
they may not even change the 10
principes principles and and some of
them are so Universal like the the 10th
principle I talk about in the book is
treat yourself and others with dignity
and respect and you know a lot of people
can look at that and say uh look doc
don't need to buy a book to to know that
I that seems pretty forthright and and
uh and
self-evident but it is not and I will
tell you why I think it is not it's the
first two words treat your
yourself with dignity and respect
because I believe you can't give away
what you don't have so if somebody uh
doesn't treat themsel with dignity and
respect if they don't heal that that
damaged personal Truth uh you and and
however that damage came about maybe
it's a woman that has been uh sexually
abused growing up by an uncle or
whatever and you know we know 95% of
molestation is by someone they know to
the family it's not the it's not the
predator in the raincoat at the at the
schoolyard saying you want some see some
pictures and Candy I mean it's somebody
we know and trust usually in these
situations but it let's say it's it's a
it's a woman that has been molested and
and and and raped in her childhood and
that's never been healed in her well if
she doesn't deal with that trauma if she
doesn't heal that trauma then her
children are not going to get 100% of
their mother they're not going to get
100% of the woman that is that mother or
if it happened to the father they're not
going to get a
100% of who he could be who they could
bring to the table the mother or the
father bring to the parenting table uh
unless they heal that damaged personal
truth and you know for for me in my
situation growing up with that I I had
to heal that personal truth my father
died when I was 42 years old and by that
time I had graduated number one in my
class with a double core of PHD programs
one medical psychology and one Clinical
Psychology and um I had a very
successful business I had very
successful marriage and children and I'd
gone to school on
two
um athletic
scholarships um I you I'm not saying I
was the greatest son in the history of
the world but I had had some achievement
but by the time he passed away in 42 at
uh when I was 42 not one time ever did
he speak the words I'm proud of you um
I I never heard that from my father um
and so I learned early on sometimes you
have to give yourself what you wish you
could get from somebody else you know
sometimes you got to step in front of
the mirror and say I'm proud of you
maybe maybe he can't say that but you
can and so you have to go through
whatever is necessary to heal yourself
and your personal Truth where you say
I'm in this this success over here this
peace this happiness this
Tranquility uh is not just for other
people that can be for me too I deserve
that as much as anybody else does and
unless and until you can do that you're
cheating everybody around you that loves
you cares about you or interfaces with
you out of all of who you are and and I
think right now uh what I'm seeing in
this country is in this Society is
intimidation uh people are not
necessarily yet willing to step up and
say I deserve for my values to be
considered I deserve for my voice to be
heard I
deserve uh to be considered and and I I
I think they are intimidated because
we've got these Fringe factions that
have
weaponized uh certain ideals and turned
them into attack strategies and um I I
think we we have to fortify these people
and then it's and then treat others with
dignity and respect but as I say you
can't give away what you don't have so
you know it all starts with yourself now
if you if you do that um if you look at
number one which is be who you are on
purpose be who you are on purpose live
with intention I me I I it it drives me
crazy to see people that uh get up and
just go with the flow whatever comes
their way what are we going to do
tomorrow well we'll see no we won't see
you you need to decide
what you're going to do tomorrow live
with intention and own it I mean I
people criticize me sometimes um and and
I but and I own what I say I own what I
do if you want to criticize me criticize
somebody's going to criticize you no
matter what you do so you might as well
do what you're passionate about what you
believe in and if they come for you then
I'm I'm I'm easy to find I I I realize
that so I'm an easy target um as just as
are you uh but we we have to decide
we're going to be who we are on purpose
we're going to live with intention and
then you jump to number 10 treat
yourself and others with dignity and
respect and you know that's a jump from
1 to 10 but to me they're very highly
related and no matter what Walk of Life
you come from whether you're well
educated or you're not whether you're
black whether you're white whether
you're male whether you're Fe whatever
um you may come at that from a different
point of view but those principles to me
are important to how you live your life
and and I think they fit everybody from
a different point of
view starting a business can be tough
especially knowing how to run your
online storefront thanks to Shopify it's
easier than ever Shopify is the global
Commerce platform that helps you sell at
every stage of your business from the
launch your online shop stage all the
way to the D we just hit a million
orders stage Shopify is there to help
you grow our marketing team uses Shopify
every every day to sell our merchandise
and we love how easy it is to add more
items ship products and track
conversions Shopify helps you turn
browsers into buyers with the internet's
best converting checkout up to 36%
better compared to other leading
Commerce platforms no matter how big you
want to grow Shopify gives you
everything you need to take control and
take your business to the next level
sign up for a $1 per month trial period
at shopify.com
jbp go to shopify.com jbp now to grow
your business business no matter what
stage you're at that's shopify.com
[Music]
jvp okay so let's I'm going to talk
about the your principle 10 to begin
with here well to elaborate on what you
said the first thing you said was that
you could be criticized for putting
forward truths that are so obvious they
don't need to be put forward and my
books have received that criticism too
and my response to that generally is is
sometimes what was formerly self-evident
now needs to be buttressed and explained
and so but I'd like to make some
counterproposals to your principle 10
just so people know what's even more
self-evident right so here's here's some
things you could do instead of abiding
by your principle number 10 treat other
people as if they are the short-term
means to whatever end you're pursuing in
the
moment okay so that's what you do if
you're an immature heatonist is you look
at other people and you think not only
what can I get from this
person but what can I get for this
person to satisfy the whim that I've
allowed to possess me this moment right
and the the ultimate expression of that
as you know clinically is something like
narcissistic psychopathy right where
every single other person is nothing but
a landscape of of opportunity for for
pleasurable and immediate self
gratification and that's the core of
truly antisocial criminal and predatory
behavior or or you can take another
perspective that would be other than
treating people with dignity and respect
and you could say well treat other
people treat other people as if they're
your pawns if you can exercise power
over
them now those are both of those
principles are in some ways equally
self-evident like if I can get what I
want from you right now why the hell
shouldn't I do it and if you're weak and
stupid and I can force you into things
why shouldn't I do it and I mean and I
and I picked Hedonism and power for a
particular reason like one of the things
I've figured out Dr Phil recently was
that when the uniting principle
dissolves so when God is dead let's say
in the nitian terms that what comes up
immediately to supplant him is Hedonism
on the on side and so that's the pull of
instinctual whim and and the drive to
power on the other and those two have a
dance and so your principle 10 is you
you aim at you don't treat other people
like they're means to your own
short-term ends and you don't worship
power does that seem does that seem
reasonable to you and then you've
aligned it with rule one or with
principle one and I'll get to that in a
sec but is that what do you think of
that take on your 10th principle no I I
I think it's a good take but it's also
not make it's also not challenging
everybody to be totally altruistic if
there is such a thing right right right
and we can talk about that probably till
the cows come home but um my point is
like I can go make a deal you know you
and I could make a deal we could we
could open a business and and we could
say Okay um Jordan uh you're going to
show up every day at 8:00 and you're
going to close every night at 8:00 P.M
um and we're going to be 5050 Partners
um and you can be so excited about it
that uh you say well yeah okay well
that's not a good deal for me because
you're not going to sit still for that
for very long it may look like I made a
great deal but I didn't make a great
deal because you're going to rebel
against that in a in a really short
period of time because you're going to
be thinking that was stupid I'm doing
all the work and he's getting half of
the the the profits out of this so it it
really doesn't work out uh if if you
explore manipulate the thing is
narcissists just don't learn you know
you you can't argue with them and they
only see things from their point of view
so they don't learn um and they can't
generalize from one situation to another
but I think most people can and and this
isn't really asking for altruism it's
asking for people to say look do what
works and it really works if you treat
yourself and other people with dignity
and respect because now you get
collaboration and and together we're
better than we are separately right well
so so what you're saying is
that sustainable recipro sustainable
reciprocal altruism is not stupid
self-sacrifice right that's basically
the issue well and I think you pointed
to the proper rationale for that is that
if if the deal you make with someone
that iterates so like a partnership or a
marriage it's going to extend across
some time if it's not predicated on
something like principles of universal
justice which would mean equality of
worth within the relationship then all
that's going to happen is it's going to
devolve into a counterproductive
bitterness and so if you're establishing
I'll give you an example I I set up a
business Enterprise with my son and uh
we had been working on a project and he
was working at another job and but he
decided that it might be worthwhile to
stop doing his other job in to focus
entirely on our project because he
thought it had some legs so what I
suggested to him was that he go away so
he wanted to know because we had worked
on it jointly what sort of deal I I
would be willing to enter into with him
and I said why don't you go away and
come back with a proposal for me that
you're really thrilled about bringing to
me that you think would also Max
maximize my incentives now cuz there's a
certain utility being associated with me
partly because I have a lot of marketing
clout let's say if you want to make it
just a capitalistic decision so I asked
him to go away and come back with a plan
that would maximally motivate him well
simultaneously maximally motivating me
and that's a good like that there's no
stupid self-sacrifice in that that's a
great thing to bring to a marriage for
example my wife and I have got better at
this in recent years especially since
our children left you know know our deal
now the deal I have with her for example
about whether or not she should
accompany me on tour and how we decide
to go about doing the next things we're
are going to do is i' i' I've told her
and vice versa that she doesn't have to
do anything that I don't want her to do
anything that she's not fully on board
with right now I could force her and
compel her and manipulate her and all of
that but your point is that well if you
do that with someone they're going to
kick back
and so that the relationship won't be
sustainable how long have you been
married 30 four years but I've known my
wife for 52 years yeah we've been we've
had a friendship for 52 years so a long
time yeah that is a long time I've been
married 47 and we've been together 50 as
well so it it didn't take uh didn't take
her as long to um make up her mind about
me I
guess yeah well yeah that that could
easily be the case so let's go through
this first one then let's turn to this
one be who you are on purpose right and
so that's very much Akin I would say to
your to your principle number five which
is conscious consciously choose which
values deserve int attention so there's
an intentionality there okay so do you
think you can differentiate for everyone
who's watching and listening what the
difference is between between that kind
of conscious
intentionality and the exploitation of
others you know because it's tricky
right I like even with this interview I
could come to this discussion with an
end in mind you know I could say well I
want to Leverage The Chance the fact
that I have a chance to talk to Dr Phil
I want to leverage that to my advantage
I want to increase my viewership and
listenership um I want to attract his
fans and the funny thing is you know
there's of that that's actually relevant
and important because I wouldn't be
doing a podcast with you if I didn't
think that it would be of interest to
the people that I'm already have
listening but also to attract new people
but then if I bend the interview to my
narrow ends then I'm manipulating you
and using you and it becomes so I'm
wondering how you how do you help people
negotiate that line between developing
an intentional vision and consciously
Cho Ching their values and yet serving
something like a higher order good well
you know I think the when you look at
number five consciously choose which
voices in your life deserve the most
attention um you know what you're
really what you're really focusing on
here
is making an informed decision which may
be part of number one when you be who
you are are on purpose you have to
decide
um am I going
to just pay the most attention to the
loudest voice just because they're the
loudest if is that what I've been doing
um and I if it is is that what I want to
do and and when you get to number five
it's I'm going to consciously choose
which goes up to number one being who
you are on purpose which voices deserve
the most attention in my life and maybe
it's your conversation with
yourself maybe it's your conversation
with god maybe it's your conversation
with uh people outside your bubble uh
maybe it's people that challenge what
may be a confirmation bias um you have
to
decide
um which voices you choose to make an
investment in and and you know I used to
think I
I I I've I've employed a lot of people
in my life because I've always been
entrepreneurial and um I know at times
I've employed as many as a thousand
people um in you know Collective
Endeavors um and I used to think for
example that if I had two people sitting
in front of me that were the same in
everything that I could determine and
the only difference was that one had
been to college and one had
not that if there were no other
tiebreakers that frankly I would tend to
go with the one that had graduated from
college even if the degree was in art
history or something that wasn't gerain
to the job I was hiring them for and the
reason was I knew something about that
person I didn't know about the other I
knew they could sustain the pursuit of a
long-term goal I knew they could get
along with I knew they could
work as a team I knew they could meet
deadlines I knew that there were a lot
of things about them that I knew that I
didn't know about this other person that
other person might could as well but I
knew that about this person I don't know
that anymore I don't know that about
college graduates anymore uh because now
they don't have the attitude that it's
their job to get along with the
professor it's their attitude that the
professor has the job to get along with
them uh it's I have no idea how much
their mind has been poisoned by what
I've termed intellectual rot from some
of these uh Elite universities so what I
used to have is kind of a tiebreaker
because I knew something about a
graduate I didn't know about a
non-graduate is not valid anymore so
I've had to change which voices I'm
willing to listen to and what things I'm
willing to give weight to uh and so in
being who I am on purpose I've had to
make adjustments as a world has changed
around me so
this in this question be or this
principle be who you are on purpose so
one question that arises out of that is
well who am I okay so I'd like to
propose to you that there are default
answers to that question the default
answers are
the immature answers we described
earlier so if you're not intentional in
who you are you end up being your
instinctual whims and your drive to
power so basically it's what a
two-year-old
does and and I even mean that
neurologically it's like you know a a
2-year-old isn't very mature they aren't
who they are on purpose they're
operating on Instinct and whim and they
have to be socialized in into the
adoption of a higher order self so you
might ask ask yourself if you're not
your short-term desires or your
short-term avoidance your short-term
wish to avoid pain who are you right and
that would be be who you are on purpose
so you might say well where can you find
who you are and so I want to ask you
what you think about this there's a
gospel statement that describes the
nature of our relationship with divinity
in a very optimistic Manner and it
proposes that if you knock the door will
open and if you ask you will receive and
if you seek you will find and so I've
tried to make that concrete let's say
when I was operating as a behavioral
therapist when I was trying to help
people discover who they were and so one
gateway to that is to ask
yourself this is this is in keeping with
your principle 10 too to treat yourself
with dignity and respect imagine that
you are caring for yourself as if you're
valuable right give yourself the benefit
of the doubt and then ask yourself this
is part of the development of a vision
ask yourself if you could have what you
needed and wanted in a manner that would
be best for you what would that look
like and you'll get an answer to that
question you'll start to be able to
develop a vision of what your life would
be like if you were deeply who you are
in a way that was sustainable and then
you can start doing that on purpose
now I'm the reason I'm asking you that
that question or and and presenting
those possibilities is because the
question of who you are that's the
question of identity is begged by your
first principle you know when people are
saying now that they're their sexual
identity right that's the biggest claim
in in our society and that they should
be proud of that claim and to me that
just reduces who someone is to well to
essentially to a very unidimensional
biological drive that seeks immediate
gratification it's a very low order
conception of Who You Are So when you
say be who you are on purpose what do
you think you're pointing to in that who
you are you I think it is a much harder
question Than People anticipate when
they begin which is why I say you've got
to really sit down and think about this
because when you ask somebody tell me
who you are and you cannot use your
occupation or what you spend most of
your time
doing um in the answer if I take that
away from them like if you're an
accountant that's what you do all day 50
60 hours a week and I say tell me who
you are and you can't use your
occupation in the
answer it's astounding to me how people
struggle because they identify
themselves with
labels and you know I'm an accountant or
I'm a I'm a welder or a welder's helper
um and now as as you say a lot of people
have uh adopted a cause and so they put
that like they want to tattoo it on
their
forehead that's not who they are and
sometimes do yes exactly uh but that's
not who they are who they are is
multi-dimensional it cuts across
intrapersonal
interpersonal uh spiritual uh familial
it it cuts across a lot of different
levels and I think it comes down to um a
real heavy if you're if you're doing a
weighted equation you have to give heavy
weight to what they believe and what
they're passionate about
and if in that description there's not
something in there that they're really
passionate about uh I I really say wow
you I I would encourage you to seek that
passion uh because I I think going
through life without a passionate
Pursuit man that's got to look like n
miles a bad Road I mean you're just yeah
you're just pushing a rock up a s Lippy
heill if you're not passionate if you're
passionate about something then all of a
sudden work
becomes something that you you you want
to do it becomes something it's it maybe
your your work and your your vocation
and your advocation can't be the same
thing but if you ever hit that uh you've
won the you've won the lottery if you
love what you do enough that it's it's
both your vocation and your avocation
and and right well I think that's the I
think that's the fortunate circumstance
that you find yourself in when you align
what could otherwise just be whim with
with a higher order calling and I think
the traditional insistence you know
there's a traditional insistence that
the spirit of God is the Divinity in
calling right and and you're pointing to
that you're you're using secular
language and likely purposefully but
your notion is that there are things
that will interest and compel you in
your life and your job is to that's the
that's the call of the treasure that the
dragon guards that's a good way of
thinking about it and that if you pursue
that that infuses your life with a kind
of sustaining meaning you know when I
wrote my first book when I wrote maps of
meaning I wrote a chapter in that book
called The Divinity of interest and it
was really a pan to calling and I knew
it was in complete and and so I want to
run this by you because I think this is
implicit in your principles too you know
you say for examp example don't reward
bad behavior or support conduct you do
not value that's number three um do not
stay silent just so others can remain
comfortable actively live and support
meritocracy those those seem to me to be
pointers to integrate conscience with
calling right so can imagine that
there's two mechanisms that Orient you
towards your higher realization let's
put it that way one would be the calling
that infuses your life with significance
and meaning but it can go off track
right it can become a a delusional
enthusiasm or a whim you need another
counterveiling Force that's something
like conscience and maybe that's the
voice of integrated negative emotion you
know the warning voice and so the
calling says go this way and the
Conscience Says yeah but stay on the
path right don't don't don't be tempted
by short-term callings stay on the path
and watch keep yourself in check and so
that seems to me to be manifested for
example in this let's look at number six
just briefly do not stay silent just so
others you could say as well do not say
stay silent just so others and yourself
can remain what comfortable and you mean
temporarily comfortable I would presume
in that utterance as well yes so the the
qu the question that begs is well look
if I can stay silent and other people
are comfortable
then why shouldn't I stay
silent and so so let's let's walk into
that what what's your sense of that well
my sense of that is that you have a lot
of people right now that are going to be
uncomfortable if you call out some
narratives that are being pushed on
society that don't gel with your values
don't gel with your sense of of factual
base and Science and that's why if you
look at number four measure all actions
based on results and all thoughts based
on
rationality and and you you're right I'm
I'm describing these in secular terms on
purpose but and people think well
rationality is not a word I use every
day so how can I use that um it's really
very simple um number one is that
thought based on verifiable fact so if
you have a thought and and we tend to
believe ourselves right I mean if if if
I put a blindfold on you and walk you
around uh downtown or whatever and and
you believe I've walked you to the edge
of a 10 story building and you believe
that we tend to believe ourselves and
that's what you're telling yourself
you're going to fight like trying to put
a cat in a sack if I'm getting you to
take the next step you're like whoa no
I'm not going to do this because I've
told
myself this is going to be a doozy when
I take the step so if you if you're
telling yourself that you tend to
believe yourself well we've got to start
getting people to verify their thoughts
um I I say that to people that are
suicidal all the time you test the
rationality of your thoughts is what
you're telling yourself this do you are
you telling yourself you want to die or
are you telling yourself you want to
stop the pain those are two very
different things and both of them have
long-term consequences so let's really
test that out uh second does it protect
and prolong your life does it get you
what you want I mean there are just some
very simple questions that you can ask
yourself and um and all of a sudden if
it fails any of those simple criteria
then you go okay I got to replace this
with something that fits the CR IIA uh
now uh people aren't just kind of
wandering around deciding well I you
know I trusted myself but I didn't
really know how to test my thinking well
I'm just giving them a very simple way
to test their thinking number one being
is it verifiable fact what you're
telling yourself and if it's not don't
even go to number two you You' you've
got to deal with facts and reality and
uh you know people that are rejecting
science uh saying biology just doesn't
apply we're going to decide that we're
we're changing all that you know there
aren't men and women we're going to
change all that well I'm I'm sorry you
don't get to just decide that I guess
you can decide that for yourself but
you're certainly not going to decide it
for me and and if you're pushing that
agenda that's where you can't stay
silent so others remain comfortable you
just can't let them run rough shot over
you and everybody else with that agenda
um just so they don't get upset with you
for saying no sorry I'm not going to let
you rewrite biology for me and my family
me and my life I'm not going to let you
pretend we didn't have slavery in our
history just because you've decided that
it's not good for kids to hear about
that well I've decided it is good for
kids to hear about that I've decided
they need to know that there were dark
times in our history and we can only
learn from those Dark Times by
acknowledging them you can't change what
you don't acknowledge you've got to
acknowledge this and and so so I I think
I'm trying to get people to start
thinking but if you give them some rules
for thinking they're going to be more
efficient about
it we are in the midst of Lent the 40
days leading up to Easter many
Christians are choosing to give up
alcohol social media and other
distractions to focus more on prayer
fasting and giving Hallow's annual pray
40 challenge is one of their most
popular last year over 1 million people
joined this year's pray 40 challenge
focuses on surrender and includes
meditations on the powerful book he
leadth me this is a story about a priest
who became a prisoner and slave in the
Soviet Union during the Cold War his
story is one of Ultimate Surrender and
we are called to surrender our worries
anxieties problems and lives to God
there will also be lent music lent
specific Bible stories and other lent in
prayers like The Seven Last Words of
Christ with Jim cisel hallow is truly
transformative and will help you connect
with your faith on a deeper level so
what are you waiting for join Hallow's
prayer 40 challenge today download the
Hallow app at hall.com Jordan and you'll
get an exclusive 3-month free trial of
all 10,000 plus prayers and meditations
that's hall.com
[Music]
Jordan right okay so you're integrating
in that answer you
integrated principle 3 four and six
three was don't reward bad behavior or
support conduct you do not value do not
stay silent just so others can remain
comfortable that's six and four was
measure all actions based on results and
thought on rationality so if I
understand you correctly one of the
things you're pointing out is that
you're called upon to make your opinion
known you're called upon to say
something you're called upon to
differentially reward and punish based
on the concordance of what you're
hearing with what you know to be true
rationally and so the the idea there
would be that part of of your conscience
calls you to oppose opinions that are
not aligned with the natural order of
things right I mean It's Tricky right
because you hear all the time in the
enlightenment rationalist types they say
follow the facts and that's a weak
argument because facts themselves don't
specify a destination on the other hand
there are opinions that fly in the face
of what's real so egregiously that if
you attend to them you're going to walk
into a pit you're going to walk off a
cliff and so if you your principle
number
six the the justification you had for
that was that you shouldn't stay silent
just so others can remain comfortable
when you know that what is being said
violates a reasonable understanding of
of the natural and social order it's
something like that and so that
indicates a Bel in an order that's
beyond the mere verbal right you know
like the Dera in particular I think it
was jacqu Dera in in on grammatology he
famously said there's nothing outside
the text now he walked that back to some
degree when he was pushed on it but I
think it does get to something that's
core in in the postmodernist ethos which
is the idea that there's nothing to
truth but the consensus of words and
that if you can change the consensus of
words you can CH you can change the
truth but the thing is is that the
verbal order has to reflect the
intrinsic order of the cosmos or it
becomes delusional like a delusional
verbal representation is internally
consistent right and people can even
develop a consensus around it which is
what a fat is or a social
contagion and so your hypothesis is
something like conscience calls us to
speak when the when the consensus
has become delusional it's something
like that does that does that seem
reasonable that is a reasonable
interpretation and you know from your
clinical experience that uh how
difficult it is to penetrate a well
structured deeply entrenched delusional
system uh I mean sometimes you can you
can spend months and months and months
uh trying to penetrate a a individual's
delusional system and think you're
making all everyway in the world um I
had a woman one time that I was working
with that was convinced that she was
being uh followed monitored and hearing
voices from her walls and I've spent all
this time and and felt like I really had
made progress and uh she said yeah I'm
you've convinced me I'm 100% you you got
me cure it DOC I'm I'm great uh and on
the way out she said I
I did however cut the wires to all the
intercom system in the house because
that's where I'm hearing the voices so
it's like I I'm with you but on the
other hand I did strip all the intercom
out of the house and I thought you know
what I'll take that partial Victory uh
but you get into confirmation bias with
people and folks don't understand when
you're dealing with people with
confirmation bias um you know research
tells us if you bring them solid
evidence to the contrary they just dig
in their heels it gets worse not better
even if you show them scientific
objective verifiable evidence to the
contrary they just dig in their heels
more so you got to deal with that first
before you can get that uh new data to
take over yeah well do do do you suppose
that's maybe a reflection of something
that you pointed to earlier I mean you
know in the story of Exodus this the
story of Exodus indicates that when
people leave a tyranny they enter a
desert right they don't leave the
Tyranny and go to the promised land they
leave a tyranny and they go to a desert
and maybe the problem with treating
delusions with rational argumentation is
that you break down the person's
self-imposed interior tyranny but you
present them with the desert so I I
wonder to what degree maybe this is
reflected in the fact you know one of
the most effective long-term cures for
Addictive Behavior especially alcoholism
appears to be religious transformation
and part of the reason for that an AA
capitalizes on that but AA also provides
people with a community that isn't
focused on addictive behavior I wonder
if the solution to the supplantation of
a delusion isn't
deconstruction you know isn't just
poking holes in the delusion but the
simultaneous elaboration of a more
comprehensive system of explanation that
doesn't have the same flaws cuses the
delusion and you kind of you kind of
intimated that when you said that it was
immoral to do nothing but deconstruct to
do nothing but poke holes without
providing a solution so I don't know
what you think about that clinically and
that hadn't occurred to me before with
regard specifically to working with
delusions yeah well I've I've seen it in
the real world uh in working with juries
um I think one of the biggest myths is
uh the burden of proof is on the
prosecution that that's a myth uh that
may be written down in the rule
books but if you're really going to
defend someone you better present the
jury with an alternative explanation
right right right right just proving a
negative is is very hard to do to begin
with but they want to hear if we're not
down here for the reason we're told
we're down here then you better give me
a alternative explanation of how this
happened and and why we're down here um
and until you give them an alternative
explanation you're fighting an uphill
battle for sure and I think that's true
with what you're saying about delusions
you need to give them an alternative
existence outside that delusional system
that's not a desert yeah well I think I
mean I think part of the
reason people need a people need a
coherent belief system because otherwise
they're
incoherent right and so what happen
happens I think this is also why power
and Hedonism have become focuses of
identity is when that when the higher
forms of identity collapse then people
default towards narratives of power
that's what the marxists do right or
this metam Marxism we have now is every
single dimension of potential comparison
between people devolves into explanation
of power right is that all there are is
there's an infinite number of dimensions
of
Oppression and it's an interesting
explanation because
when systems deteriorate they do
deteriorate in the direction of power
and oppression so there's almost no
system that you can point to that can't
be explained in part with a power
narrative and
alternatively you can have a narrative
of of instantaneous gratification
something like that and it's better to
place that with well that's what we're
struggling with in this conversation
right is that we you want to replace
those narratives of power and and
gratification with a higher order
narrative that offers more and explains
more simultaneously you you at least
want to replace it with a social system
uh
where you're not in a situation where
you've I I would and I'm not the first
one to say that this and it's been said
it's been said better than I can say it
uh but I I would a lot rather have
questions I can't answer than answers I
can't question and right now we're in a
situation too often where we have
answers we can't question because if if
you question and answer you're labeled a
hater you're labeled some kind of phobe
you're label some kind of of of of
heretic just by asking a question God
forbid you
disagree uh but I I would a lot rather
have a a whole set of questions we
haven't found the answers for yet then
have a whole set of answers I'm not
permitted to even challenge question dig
in on and I think that's where we are uh
when we're dealing with Cults when we're
dealing with power mongers so imagine
that it's easy to confuse a questioner
with a deconstructionist right so let's
say I'm in a comfortable delusion and
you come along and start asking
questions now my objection to you could
be you're doing nothing but poking holes
now you're making the claim and I think
this is actually a pointer to what the
higher part of identification should be
now is that so for example the ancient
Egyptians worshiped the Open Eye right
that's the Eye of Horus and their notion
was that the force that renews
everything is the eye that pays
attention and and it's akin to the idea
of questioning right the the the the the
the Redemptive questioner questions to
build he doesn't question to destroy but
it's easy for people who are entrenched
in the delusion to treat every
questioner as if he's nothing but an
agent of Destruction and you know you
you mention something here which
is work hard to understand the way
others see things if if you're a
questioner and you're using your
questioning to do nothing but destroy
the other person's belief system to
elevate your moral stature right to show
that you're smarter to show that you
have all the answers that's like the sin
of intellectual Pride I would say it's
easy to be viewed as a deconstructive
agent then you can understand why people
get defensive about their beliefs so you
need to question in the attempt to
replace what's insufficient with
something better right so you have to be
a builder and a questioner and it it
seems to me that
that that conception of who you
are that's part and parcel of treating
yourself and others with dignity and
respect or even be being who you are on
purpose that means something like the
recognition that you're a building
questioner right not a destroying
questioner and putting that at the
center I think it I think that requires
you to do something that most people I
don't think come too naturally and that
is we have to
determine what other people's currency
is because we assume that people have
the same currency as
ourselves and that not only is not true
it's often not the case for example
I think um and you know I work a lot
with law enforcement and um I've I've
I've done training with law enforcement
on U interrogation techniques how to um
do deception detection things of that
nature and I always love talking to the
negotiators um about how to get where
you want to get in a negotiation and um
Chris Voss who's uh probably the most U
experienced negotiator with the
FBI um who's now retired uh will will
tell you this very thing he will tell
you that your best shot of Ever Getting
hostages out uh
from uh a hostage taker
is if you can get that hostage Aker to
fully and completely believe that you
understand why they took that Hostage to
begin with whether it's a whether it's a
domestic violence situation or a
political situation or whatever if they
understand that you get why they did
what they did to begin with so they feel
heard that a big part of their currency
is I want to be heard I want to be
understood here I want people to
understand and get why I felt driven to
this desperate act um that if you can
convince them that hey I get it I I I'm
not saying I agree with you but I see
through your eyes how the world looked
and why you did what you did not saying
I agree with it not saying you're going
to get away with it I'm just telling you
I understand how this looked from your
point of view and I mean that's true all
the way down to a teenager wanting to
have a later
curfew you know they they can assume
well you know my mom and dad just want
to control me and they're saying he's
just wanting to be more independent and
if you really
listen you can find out wait a minute
they're being motivated by the currency
of safety they know that most of the
accidents happened between when the bars
let out in the next two hours they want
me off the street for safety purposes
and if they understand he wants to be
with his friends when all the fund's
happening right at the end of the
evening and they could negotiate where
they both get what they want if they can
just agree you're going to be at
somebody's house verifiably hanging out
during that time uh then we can
negotiate something in between you're
off the street but I don't have to be
home with Mommy and Daddy so I if they
understand they each have a different
currency giving becomes much easier and
but to do that you've got to really
listen and learn from somebody to know
what's important to them right well
you're well and you're pointing to
something there that's a source of
inestimable reward in relationship to
listening because you know a skeptic
might say well for example why should I
listen to you if I can just force you to
do what I
want and there's a couple of answers to
that I mean the first answer
is well you might be able to force the
person now but that doesn't mean you're
going to be able to force them tomorrow
and it certainly doesn't mean you're
going to be able to force them once they
come along with all your F their friends
and tell you to go to hell and so
Solutions imposed by force tend to be
unstable so that's very much worth
knowing and you know I've looked so you
know I interviewed I interviewed Chris
Voss by the way but I also interviewed
France deal about chimpanzees and he's
one of the world's foremost
primatologists he's pointed out quite
clearly that chimp Alphas who use Force
have very shortterm and violent Reigns
and they Reign Over very fractured and
destabilized chimp troops so you can use
Force for a while but it'll it'll come
back to haunt you so then you might say
well what's the alternative and you laid
that out to some degree with work hard
to understand the way others see things
if if I can understand what it is that
you value and then I can negotiate with
you a solution that enables you to move
forward to what you value while we while
I move forward simultaneously toward
what I value then we've instantly
created a relationship that will survive
without
supervision all right that's one of the
things that's so cool about that is that
if you if you pay attention to someone
and you understand what motivates them
and then that's built into your
agreement you don't have to be a tyrant
and you don't have to micromanage
because you and the person will walk
side by side without Mutual supervision
right so John P figured this out by the
way when he was studying children you
know he figured this out technically he
said if you put imagine you put two
systems in head-to-head competition with
one another one system was uh like an
aristocratic tyranny to down using force
and another system was bottom up using
voluntary agreement the system based on
voluntary agreement will always
outcompete the system based on on Force
because the system based on force will
waste energy in um
enforcement well and he was exactly
right and you know PJ also showed that
actual learning that would be
incorporated and
saved was much better from the bottom up
than from the top down because people
felt a degree of cooperation and PJ was
right about that right right right right
yeah well that's partly why too even in
Psychotherapy you know part of the
reason you don't give people advice as a
psychotherapist is because if you
haven't walked through the process of
coming to the
conclusion the conclusion itself is
rather weak so if I deliver my client a
ready you know now and then you know
this is now and then you've got someone
in your therapeutic practice and they're
in a fix and you know how you they could
get out of it you could just tell them
but if you tell them first of all they
they don't get to solve the problem and
you can take credit for that you steal
that from them and second they actually
haven't gone through the effort
necessary to generate the knowledge
structure that will enable them to solve
similar problems in the future it's like
you can you can control everything your
child does and nothing bad will happen
to them but as soon as your child
doesn't have you around they're
completely bereft you know maybe that
was your goal all along if you're like a
devouring mother for example but but
I wonder how much of that is that
Associated that assoc are those ideas
associated with your principles seven
and eight said actively live and support
meritocracy and identify and build
consequential knowledge is there a
bridge to that that that that what would
you say that willingness to take it upon
yourself to solve problems and and to
and to deal with your own Affairs well
you're you're certainly right about the
meritocracy I I believe this um we we've
made some really bad decisions and I saw
it happen um with you know covid where
uh the United States government spent
$5.5
trillion in giveaways during covid and
4.4 trillion of it went into checking or
savings which means it wasn't urgently
needed did uh people just tucked it away
and said yeah thanks we'll take that and
tuck it away um and then they uh they
they pay people more not to work than to
work and I mean that
literally uh when you take all of the
bonuses and the credits and uh extending
unemployment plus the $600 a week bonus
on top of
unemployment and the person is able to
stay home and not pay what in La was $7
a gallon for gas at one point so they
don't have to do the commute and have
that expense and they don't have any
wardrobe expense and all and they can
just sit on
uh the couch and and not work and then
all that's over and they can't
understand why the supply chain is is
paralyzed well you know let's think that
through guys you pay people not to work
and so you get people not
working uh hell Lassie could figure this
one out uh it you got what you paid for
and and I we had so many lifelong
businesses wiped out by the
mismanagement of covid that it's it's
heartbreaking I mean these people that
spent Generations building these family
businesses that work so hard and the
margin was narrow and and a high
percentage of those businesses never
recovered they never came back and you
you see what happened in and one of my
problems is we do have a generation that
is experiencing a mental emotional
crisis with the highest levels of
anxiety depression and and
loneliness uh since records have been
kept and and the agencies that keep
those records the CDC and the Department
of Education and and others are the very
ones that shut the schools down they
shut the schools down and as I said
early in our conversation I was fine
with that for a couple of weeks but then
it turns into months and then it turns
into a year and in some cases it turned
into two years with remote learning uh
that they knew did not work particularly
uh with low
socioeconomic uh and inner city
populations uh who didn't have good
Wi-Fi connections didn't have parents
there to help them along the way and
when they shut the schools down for that
long they did that knowing these kids
were in a mental and emotional crisis
and they knew that those schools were a
Lifeline to those kids that they needed
that for emotional development they
needed it for educational achievement
they needed it so they had Social
Development and they shut it down anyway
they also o knew that the mandated
reporters the teachers the counselors
the cafeteria workers and bus drivers
and coaches were at the schools and
those were the ones who had their eyes
on these children and could report if
they saw signs that the child was being
molested or the child was being abused
in the home they shut all of that down
and when they did those referrals
dropped 40 to 50% in in some major
markets and these kids were sent home
behind closed doors locked up with the
very
abusers it it's not that the abuse went
down 40 or 50% it probably went up
because of the frustration of being
locked up at home behind those doors and
they shut the schools down without any
plan for bringing them back and you and
so you ask questions about it and they
say well we did the best we could with
what we knew at the time no you did not
do the best you could with what you knew
at the time you had information that
these children were not as susceptible
to this disease as everyone else was you
knew they were in a mental health crisis
you knew this was their lifeline and you
yanked it out from under them and you
damn well knew what you were doing when
you did it so lur lurking behind that
the your principles seven and eight I've
got about three more questions I hope we
can address and so we'll start with this
one I think I've been thinking a lot
about what might constitute a
meritocracy from a technical perspective
know and so well the first thing we
might point out is that hopefully we
could all agree that there are some
things that are worth doing in
comparison to other things and if we
can't agree on that we can't ever get
anything done so some things are worth
doing in comparison to
others doing the things that should be
done efficiently and effectively means
that we can do more of them or we can do
the good thing faster and so that seems
to be good and then a meritocracy
is it's essentially reward for those
things it's reward for those things and
punishment for failure to do it right so
once you decide that something is to be
done you valued it then you value those
actions and patterns of attention that
will lead to that outcome and that's a
meritocracy right and so then you could
add a another level of definition there
that ties in with what we've been
describing is that if the proper you if
the proper self is something
like long-term Harmony
established voluntarily with others then
a proper
meritocracy is a system that rewards
behaviors that are aimed at that and
punishes those that aren't right and
that's also what you would be called
upon to speak about for example when
you're not staying silent just so others
can remain comfortable so there's a
technical issue with regards to
meritocracy here now I want to so you
you can tell me what you think about
that but then want to tie that into
something you mentioned much earlier too
which is the tyranny of The Fringe right
so I think there's always a fringe right
and I I think The Fringe generally tends
to be people who are pursuing power and
people who are pursuing short-term
hedonistic self-gratification and The
Fringe is much noisier and much louder
and much more dominant than it's been
certainly that that I can ever remember
and I'm wondering Dr Phil do you think
maybe it's a been wrestling with this
idea you know we're all connected
together now and there's no reason to
assume that what's pathological can't
spread with equal rapidity compared to
what's
valuable right so now we're all hooked
together we could say well good ideas
spread faster but we can say well yeah
bad ideas bad contagious ideas also
spread faster
now part of what stops bad contagious
ideas from spreading in re in real life
is that there's you can identify the
people who are spreading them and you
can stop them it's because you see them
face to face and maybe you in principle
continually interact with them right so
they can be held responsible so here's
here's a hypothesis it's a deep
hypothesis you tell me what you think
about it virtualization enables
psychopathy and the reason it does is
because it decouples action from
consequences I mean it's almost like a
definition of virtualization right I
mean if I'm an anonymous sadistic troll
I can say whatever the hell I want to
anyone whenever I want and not only do I
not have consequences I may get
attention for it right so the incentive
structure so imagine this and I'm asking
you your opinion as a psychologist so
two questions do you think
virtualization might enable
psychopathy and if it does then what do
you think of the danger that poses well
I'll answer both of those questions and
I I answer
them uh pretty much in the affirmative I
don't think that
situations create Heroes for example and
I don't think situations create
Psychopaths I think it reveals who they
are and and so you get someone that
becomes a keyboard bully you get
somebody that goes uh just completely
out of
control I I would suggest that they
probably were just lying in the weeds
waiting for the
opportunity uh to be who to exploit yeah
to just exploit attack and be who they
were without the consequences and you
know that's why you see people in road
rage yelling and screaming with veins
popping out of their neck at somebody in
a car that can't hear them they would
never say that to somebody in an
elevator right right right but they've
got the also that anonymity yeah exactly
exactly and and it's the same thing with
the keyboard bullies uh they they've got
the anonymity and it may be somebody in
their grandmother's basement or it could
be um you know somebody that you work
with and they have a different identity
and they would never say that to you
across your desk uh and I I think that's
a real problem uh so yeah I I do think
it enables them to be who they they
probably were to begin with and and and
that's that's one of the consequences
that's one of the unintended
consequences of the technology and you
know I hear um you know people talking
about you know some of the things with
with um um the uptick in uh activity and
uh the transgender movement and they say
well we don't think there's a contagion
effect here well
really uh you know you you've got
10 eight nine 10 times the
activity uh and with girls uh that yeah
right we didn't have before I mean it
was typically boys not girls now girls
out strip the boys like what 1,00% and I
I'm I I'm saying that by recall so I'm
not offering that as fact um but
certainly by a big number and they say
but we don't think it's a contagion
effect well of course it
is it's it's got to be contagion effect
people are seeing that they say well
it's they just feel more free to come
out uh about it well well it's the pop
yeah that's such rubbish the not only is
it a contagion effect as we can tell by
its insanely rapid spread but we know
it's a contagion effect because
psychogenic epidemics have always rage
through young women like there's a
documented history of that going back
350 years there's a great book called
discovery of the unconscious by a man
named Henry ellenburger which was a
canonical text for psychoanalytic
training for about 30 years and it truly
is a brilliant book and he documents
psychogenic epidemics literally going
back I'd say 400 years and it's always
young women and it's partly young women
I think because they are more agreeable
but it's also partly young women because
they hit puberty earlier and have to
wrestle with its relatively dramatic
psychological consequences at a slightly
less
developed at a at a slightly earlier age
and that makes a real difference and so
the fact that you're pointing to the
contagion of the trans phenomena among
not its typical sufferers who as you
pointed out historically were male but
young women is clear evidence to anyone
who isn't purposefully stuffing up their
ears and blinding their eyes that this
is a social epidemic and I'm so
embarrassed I'm so embarrassed to be a
member really of the psychological
community at this point Dr Phil because
this epidemic has revealed a cowardice
among my peers that I would have never
believed possible a level of
pathological silence and and enabling
that runs against absolutely everything
that the psychotherapeutic Enterprise in
principle was designed to forall so it's
it's a hideous it's a hideous situation
well we've seen the U it's more than
just silence I'm afraid because we've
seen the American Psychological
Association the American Psychiatric
association the American Medical
Association The Academy of in
endocrinology uh on and on that have all
signed off on it and they're complicit
not just silent yeah and I just I've
never
seen um anything else where people had
where these organizations or professions
had less evidence that something didn't
cause long-term harm before they signed
off on it ever um and yeah ever right I
I agree so I don't get it and I don't
think history is going to be kind I'm
not a physician so so I always tell
people you know I'm not a physician so
um you know take take that for what you
will but I the you know I think the
thing that got me into this profession
to begin with is as early as 12 13 years
old I became fascinated with why people
do what they do and don't do what they
don't do and I can I remember the day
that it got a grip on me uh and I was
never the same after that day but I've
been fascinated with that equation why
people do what they do and don't do what
they don't do and if you understand that
uh I mean that is a great tool in life
in in getting things done and
understanding uh others and I I just you
you can't spend your life focused on
that and not see things like a contagion
effect you know there are rules for
reporting on suicide you know for the
media we'll do a story about young girl
girls there were two young girls up on
the East Coast one time that were in
love with the same boy and they had this
insane suicide pack so they stepped in
front of one of these high-speed trains
together and when it impacted them it
made the shape of a heart where it
impacted them and all these media were
were romanticizing this and showing this
I'm thinking how could you do that every
girl with a broken heart now can see
that and say oh my God how romantic is
that you're in fighting contagion when
you do that and we refuse to report it
Dr Phil that's going to happen in Canada
like this is what's going to happen in
Canada so I told the Canadian government
back in 2016 that their bill c16 would
produce a social contagion among young
women I said that directly to the Senate
but now there's something else happening
and I'd like your opinion about it so
Canada is going to extend its euthanasia
operation to the mentally
ill now they've already tried to do that
it didn't work yet but that's where it's
headed so my sense now I've already seen
one case report of this but my sense is
that this is what's going to happen is
that they'll extend made medically
assisted death it's the Canadian
euthanasia program they're going to
extend that to the mentally ill and to
minors and so what we're going to get is
a death Romanticism of made suicide
among young women and it'll eclipse the
trans contagion I think and I think
it'll happen for exactly the reason that
you just described is we'll get romantic
accounts of early suicide among
attention seeking desperate young women
who are also tempted you know this too
because if someone does have a
pronounced depressive temperament one of
The Temptations that's going to befall
them is the belief that everyone else
around them would be better off if they
weren't
there number you see how that can take
on a it's the number one reason for
suicide right they're burden they
believe they're a burden right right
right exactly exactly and that can
easily be romanticized especially if you
also want to avoid the responsibility of
growing up right because that's another
well that's why there are suicidal
crisis among adolescents is because know
they are deciding whether they're going
to take on the burden of responsibility
of adulthood and the opportunity and
adventure of adulthood as well well how
do they easy to romanticize the go ahead
how do they answer this question how
does that
individual if they have a mental illness
to this level that they they they want
to
die how does that person give informed
consent if they're incapacitated to the
point with a mental illness that they
want to die how do they give informed
consent oh yeah you and your logic look
man how does a 13-year-old give consent
for a double ectomy we're already way
past that we've blown out the we've
blown out the necessity for informed
consent long ago and that'll provide
absolutely no barrier whatsoever to the
to the people who are pushing the ma
agenda in Canada like Dr Phil that
question won't they'll there'll there'll
be there'll be endless academic Papers
written by demented ethicists providing
an act an answer are in the affirmative
which will be something like well
they're still they're still they still
have sufficient capacity to decide
whether they're lived experience
indicates that their suffering is such
that it would be better if they didn't
exist and you have no right to interfere
with that there that's how it'll be
justified Jordan are we just clinicians
that forgot to check our common sense at
the Ivory Tower when we were leaving
campus is that is that the problem look
you know well you know I don't know know
what to make of this because I know
perfectly well that the cohort of people
I graduated with say back in the 1990s
were very well-trained clinicians I
think that I think that well what's
happened to me in Canada you may know
this is that my license is being
threatened by the Canadian the Ontario
College of psychologists it's not just
being threatened I mean their plan is to
take it now they're taking it because of
things I've said now the thing about me
is that I don't give a damn if they take
it and at this point I just assume not
be part of their bloody Club anyways but
but you know there's nothing they can do
to me I'm not practicing at the moment
except on a broad public scale and I
have an in multiple independent sources
of income and I don't even have to live
in Canada so you know I can tell them to
go to Hell Without too much damage but
I'm watching what's happening in Canada
and the colleges the the medical
colleges and the psychological colleges
have sufficient clout so that Anyone who
puts a toe Outside the Lines can be
certain that they will be the recipient
of anonymous denunciations that they
will be subjected to endless expensive
laware and that they could well be
stripped of their right to practice and
those are not trivial trivial
punishments and you know generally
people can't withstand them so I have a
two-part question maybe that we can use
to to wrap things up here the first
first an observation
you've you've been popping up everywhere
in the social media World especially in
the last couple of weeks and I have a
question about that that's personal and
also one that's more issues based let's
say I've noticed that it's been very
hard for people who've made a name for
themselves in the traditional media to
transition so to speak to the online
world it's sort of like watching TV
actors try to make it in the movie world
sometimes that works but most of the
time it doesn't now it does really seem
to be working for you and I'm wondering
why that's working for you and how
you've managed it how that's related to
your new book
and what you think is driving you
forward to continue speaking as you have
in your Legacy Media career but now
increasingly online so let's see if we
can address all of those points what is
it that you're doing right to make this
transition to the online world
and why what is driving you forward to
continue to speak on these issues well
that's a two-part question and I'll
treat it just that way I think the the
part about um social media is um
probably driven uh from a negative
standpoint uh in the sense that I think
there are a lot of factions out there
that think I'm very dangerous right now
uh because I'm talking about things that
don't allow them to remain comfortable
and I I'm willing to debate anybody
anywhere about anything that I'm
qualified in my opinion to talk about
and I'm not going to tell you what to do
with your 401k because I can't add two
and two and get five every time but when
you talk about the things that are in my
book um if you've noticed there are
extensive references to the professional
literature at the end of every chapter
because I do my homework and I know that
literature backwards and forwards and
I've studied it I've read it I I don't
go get my information on Google um I I I
get it by actually reading the core
articles and understanding why these
things are are happening and um I I
think when I go out and talk about these
things I think it's very threatening to
some people I've been
shadowbanned I I've had videos that go
up and they just go crazy viral for 15
minutes and all of a sudden bang they're
gone uh and my cyber security people
tell me that they're being targeted and
taken down uh things at the border when
I've been down there things that I've
talked about um uh you know just
concerning you know content in the book
I I think that um I'm clearly there it's
backfiring there's an attempt to silence
me on these matters and I think it's
backfiring because uh people want to
hear uh what I have to say and and
people are getting their information
differently now they're getting their
information on YouTube and social media
platforms and that sort of thing so uh a
lot of that stuff I'm not posting others
are posting from what I've done or said
somewhere here there or ywn uh but April
2nd I do launch Meritt Street Media the
24-hour Network and we'll be in
somewhere between 75 and 90 million
homes uh I think it'll be the biggest
launch since Fox as I was saying so I
think it's going to be prolific for
people to find and um you know you got
to take a position and I I'm willing to
take a position and I think people find
that both threatening and refreshing I
think it covers the
Gambit uh and and that's okay I get a
lot of U hate mail I've had death
threats I've you know all that I I took
a strong position on Hamas and Israel um
I I was sicking to see students on
campuses around the United States uh
Elite campuses out rallying for what I
consider to be uh assassins and
murderers it's like we're not teaching
critical thinking here how is it I'm
hearing rhetoric that I haven't heard
since I had read translated transcript
of the Hitler youth movement on American
campuses what how is this possible uh
and and and nobody was saying anything
about it so I started saying something
about it and um boy did that heat things
up you know you're in a position where
your words have authority and you have
access to much public attention and and
that's a position that I'm in and have
been for a while
and I'm wondering how you differentiate
in your own life between the Temptations
of narcissistic self-aggrandisement in
the public eye let say and your your
duty to speak forthrightly about things
you believe to be important I mean you
have had a long career you have more
than enough money for the rest of your
life there's no need for you in the
privation sense to be in the public eye
speaking how do you protect yourself
against the fact that you can be tempted
towards self- glorification let's say
and self-aggrandisement by the fact of
your media presence and how do you know
that you're
speaking for what's true rather than
blowing your own horn let's say
and you know increasing your own
building a Tower of Babel to your own
posterity well absolutely fair question
and um I I
think I I've long believed that too much
time in the spotlight Fades the suit and
I you know I'm in a position where I can
go pretty much on any uh media Outlet
anytime that I want to they're happy to
to have uh to have me on uh I think it's
going to get less so with some with some
Outlets pretty fast uh but
I I think my rule has always been uh if
it's not real obvious to the viewer why
you're there you shouldn't go if you're
going just because you can instead of it
being really obvious that you're there
with a purpose and a passion um to speak
about things that matter to people who
care you shouldn't be there at all and
you know I probably
do you know one out of 10 or 20 media
requests that I get because I just um I
I I think it's important to play Big not
long play Big not often and I think if
you choose carefully uh where you speak
and what you say uh you can have much
more of an impact than uh just being
elevator
noise and why would you say that you're
you're you're compelled to continue to
do it what do you think you're up to
what do you hope you're up to I hope
what I'm up to is you know I I really
looked around and was very very
concerned uh where this society's headed
right now and I also looked around to
see um who was willing to step up and
speak about it and I am certainly not
the only one uh but I felt like uh being
uh trained in in Clinical Psychology and
uh some of the things that I I have
experience in that I had a unique
perspective to talk about the collective
Consciousness um because as you know
there's an individual Consciousness and
then there's a collective consciousness
of the family of the community of the
region the state the the country and
I I I think that I I was seeing a void
where people weren't really talking
about that they weren't really talking
about uh people
exercising um their their right to have
a voice within that Collective
Consciousness and I was concerned that
what we were seeing taught in the
universities was going to put a
generation in charge of this country
next when my grandchildren are going to
be out there living their lives that I
was just uncomfortable with I just
thought you know we're we're we're
coddling these students we're not
preparing them for the next level of
Life somebody's got to step up and raise
hell about
this um and I felt passionate about it
and so that's why I decided to keep
going I see I see I see well I can I
hope I hope I can relate to that so all
right sir well um I'm wondering if
there's anything we we we covered your
your book relatively comprehensively we
covered a lot of ground today I'm
wondering is there anything else I'm
going to continue to talk to Dr Phil as
me many of you know on The Daily wire
side I'm going to delve into
autobiographical matters a bit and get
to know them on the personal side and so
if you're inclined to join us for that
that would be well and good um on the
Free Speech side it doesn't hurt to
throw some support the daily wire way
because they are doing what they can to
be a Bastion of of alternative opinion
in a landscape of woke nonsense and so
that's worth some consideration um is
there anything else that you would like
to bring to people's attention on this
side before we bid each other farewell
well I would just like to say
um it's really been refreshing to talk
to somebody that knows what the hell
they're talking about when I'm talking
about a lot of these Concepts and and
principles that um are
sometimes nuanced and U you obviously
did your homework on this and I I I I
really appreciate that and I know how
busy you are but to um have a clinician
on the other end that picks up the
nuances of what we're doing has been
very refreshing Jordan so I can't thank
you enough it's a pleasure to talk to
you and I appreciate the fact that you
took the time to talk to me today and
and to everyone that's watching and
listening and to all of you who are
watching and listening as well um
your attention is never taken for
granted and it's much appreciated and to
the Daily wire plus folks for making
this possible here in Florida today I
appreciate the effort that went into
that to the film crew here as well for
handling this so professionally that's
also much appreciated and so and and so
farewell to all you who are watching
listening and and Dr Phil very good to
talk to you today look forward to
talking again soon thank
you
[Music]